Video platform blames deletion of criticisms on an error in its automated systems

Agence France-Presse


Tech entrepreneur Palmer Luckey said comments he made about the Chinese Communist party had been deleted on YouTube. Photograph: Robyn Beck/AFP/Getty Images

YouTube is investigating the apparently automatic removal of comments critical of the Chinese Communist party amid complaints of censorship.

The company said the filtering appeared to be “an error” amid a greater reliance on automated systems during the coronavirus pandemic because its human reviewers have been sent home.

The inquiry was sparked by media reports on complaints from technology entrepreneur Palmer Luckey. Other Twitter users responded to Luckey’s tweet that they, too, believed comments about the Communist party had been removed.

Luckey, a founder of the virtual reality group Oculus who is now works for a defence tech firm, tweeted: “YouTube has deleted every comment I ever made about the Wumao, an internet propaganda division of the Chinese Communist party,” and suggested the filtering appeared to be a new policy of censorship.
Michael Moore film Planet of the Humans removed from YouTube
Read more

The comments attracted the attention of Republican Senator Ted Cruz, who called the matter “very disturbing”.

“Why is Google/YouTube censoring Americans on behalf of the CCP? This is WRONG,” Cruz tweeted. “Big Tech is drunk with power. The Sherman Act prohibits abusing monopoly power. DOJ (Department of Justice) needs to stop this NOW.”

Cruz appeared to be referring to unsubstantiated comments from the White House that large tech firms are biased against conservatives and should be hit for antitrust violations.

YouTube, which is owned by Google, said in a statement it had made no policy changes and that its filters were designed to remove only “spammy, hateful or harassing comments” from the platform.

“This appears to be an error in our enforcement systems and we are investigating,” a YouTube spokesperson said of the complaints. “Users can report suspected issues to troubleshoot errors and help us make product improvements.”

YouTube said in March it expected to see more content removal as a result of its reliance on machine learning instead of human moderators.
You've read 6 articles ...

... in the last six months, so we hope you will consider supporting our independent journalism today. More people, like you, are reading and supporting the Guardian’s independent, investigative journalism than ever before. Unlike many news organisations, we made the choice to keep our reporting open for all, regardless of where they live or what they can afford to pay.

The Guardian will engage with the most critical issues of our time – from the escalating climate catastrophe to widespread inequality to the influence of big tech on our lives. At a time when factual information is a necessity, we believe that each of us, around the world, deserves access to accurate reporting with integrity at its heart.

Our editorial independence means we set our own agenda and voice our own opinions. Guardian journalism is free from commercial and political bias and not influenced by billionaire owners or shareholders. This means we can give a voice to those less heard, explore where others turn away, and rigorously challenge those in power.

With your support we can keep delivering quality journalism that’s open and independent. Every reader contribution, however big or small, is so valuable.